================================
Writing an Interpreter with PyPy
================================
Written by Andrew Brown <brownan@gmail.com>, with help from the PyPy developers
on the pypy-dev mailing list.

This tutorial's master copy and supporting files live at
https://bitbucket.org/brownan/pypy-tutorial/

When I first learned about the PyPy project, it took me a while to figure out
exactly what it was about. For those that don't already know, it's two things:

* A set of tools for implementing interpreters for interpreted languages
  
* An implementation of Python using this toolchain
  
The second part is probably what most people think PyPy is, but this tutorial
is *not* about their Python interpreter.  It is about writing your own
interpreter for your own language.

This is the project I undertook to help myself better understand how PyPy works
and what it's all about.

This tutorial assumes you know very little about PyPy, how it works, and even
what it's all about. I'm starting from the very beginning here.

What PyPy Does
==============
Here's a brief overview of what PyPy can do. Let's say you want to write an
interpreted language. This involves writing some kind of source code parser, a
bytecode interpretation loop, and lots of standard library code.

That's quite a bit of work for moderately complicated languages, and there's a
lot of low level work involved. Writing the parser and compiler code usually
isn't fun, that's why there are tools out there to generate parsers and
compilers for you.

Even then, you still must worry about memory management in your interpreter,
and you're going to be re-implementing a lot if you want data types like
arbitrary precision integers, nice general hash tables, and such. It's enough
to put someone off from implementing their idea for a language.

Wouldn't it be nice if you could write your language in an existing high level
language like, for example, Python? That sure would be ideal, you'd get all the
advantages of a high level language like automatic memory management and rich
data types at your disposal.  Oh, but an interpreted language interpreting
another language would be slow, right? That's twice as much interpreting going
on.

As you may have guessed, PyPy solves this problem. PyPy is a sophisticated
toolchain for analyzing and translating your interpreter code to C code (or JVM
or CLI). This process is called "translation", and it knows how to translate
quite a lot of Python's syntax and standard libraries, but not everything. All
you have to do is write your interpreter in **RPython**, a subset of the Python
language carefully defined to allow this kind of analysis and translation, and
PyPy will produce for you a very efficient interpreter.

Because efficient interpreters should not be hard to write.

The Language
============
The language I've chosen to implement is dead simple. The language runtime
consists of a tape of integers, all initialized to zero, and a single pointer
to one of the tape's cells. The language has 8 commands, described here:

>
    Moves the tape pointer one cell to the right
    
<
    Moves the tape pointer one cell to the left
    
+
    Increments the value of the cell underneath the pointer
    
-
    Decrements the value of the cell underneath the pointer

[
    If the cell under the current pointer is 0, skip to the instruction after
    the matching ]
    
]
    Skip back to the matching [ (evaluating its condition)
    
.
    Print out a single byte to stdout from the cell under the pointer
    
,
    Read in a single byte from stdin to the cell under the pointer
    
Any unrecognized bytes are ignored.

Some of you may recognize this language. I will be referring to it as BF.

One thing to notice is that the language is its own bytecode; there is no
translation from source code to bytecode. This means that the language can be
interpreted directly: the main eval loop of our interpreter will operate right
on the source code. This simplifies the implementation quite a bit.

First Steps
===========
Let's start out by writing a BF interpreter in plain old Python. The first step
is sketching out an eval loop::

    def mainloop(program):
        tape = Tape()
        pc = 0
        while pc < len(program):
            code = program[pc]

            if code == ">":
                tape.advance()
            elif code == "<":
                tape.devance()
            elif code == "+":
                tape.inc()
            elif code == "-":
                tape.dec()
            elif code == ".":
                sys.stdout.write(chr(tape.get()))
            elif code == ",":
                tape.set(ord(sys.stdin.read(1)))
            elif code == "[" and value() == 0:
                # Skip forward to the matching ]
            elif code == "]" and value() != 0:
                # Skip back to the matching [

            pc += 1
        
As you can see, a program counter (pc) holds the current instruction index. The
first statement in the loop gets the instruction to execute, and then a
compound if statement decides how to execute that instruction.

The implementation of [ and ] are left out here, but they should change the
program counter to the value of the matching bracket. (The pc then gets
incremented, so the condition is evaluated once when entering a loop, and once
at the end of each iteration)
        
Here's the implementation of the Tape class, which holds the tape's values as
well as the tape pointer::

    class Tape(object):
        def __init__(self):
            self.thetape = [0]
            self.position = 0

        def get(self):
            return self.thetape[self.position]
        def set(self, val):
            self.thetape[self.position] = val
        def inc(self):
            self.thetape[self.position] += 1
        def dec(self):
            self.thetape[self.position] -= 1
        def advance(self):
            self.position += 1
            if len(self.thetape) <= self.position:
                self.thetape.append(0)
        def devance(self):
            self.position -= 1
            
As you can see, the tape expands as needed to the right, indefinitely. We
should really add some error checking to make sure the pointer doesn't go
negative, but I'm not worrying about that now.
            
Except for the omission of the "[" and "]" implementation, this code will work
fine.  However, if the program has a lot of comments, it will have to skip over
them one byte at a time at runtime. So let's parse those out once and for all.

At the same time, we'll build a dictionary mapping between brackets, so that
finding a matching bracket is just a single dictionary lookup. Here's how::

    def parse(program):
        parsed = []
        bracket_map = {}
        leftstack = []

        pc = 0
        for char in program:
            if char in ('[', ']', '<', '>', '+', '-', ',', '.'):
                parsed.append(char)

                if char == '[':
                    leftstack.append(pc)
                elif char == ']':
                    left = leftstack.pop()
                    right = pc
                    bracket_map[left] = right
                    bracket_map[right] = left
                pc += 1
        
        return "".join(parsed), bracket_map

This returns a string with all invalid instructions removed, and a dictionary
mapping bracket indexes to their matching bracket index.

All we need is some glue code and we have a working BF interpreter::

    def run(input):
        program, map = parse(input.read())
        mainloop(program, map)
        
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        import sys
        run(open(sys.argv[1], 'r'))
        
If you're following along at home, you'll also need to change the signature of
mainloop() and implement the bracket branches of the if statement. Here's the
complete example: `<example1.py>`_

At this point you can try it out to see that it works by running the
interpreter under python, but be warned, it will be *very* slow on the more
complex examples::

    $ python example1.py 99bottles.b
    
You can find mandel.b and several other example programs (not written by me) in
my repository.
        
PyPy Translation
================
But this is not about writing a BF interpreter, this is about PyPy. So what
does it take to get PyPy to translate this into a super-fast executable?

As a side note, there are some simple examples in the pypy/translator/goal
directory of the PyPy source tree that are helpful here. My starting point for
learning this was the example "targetnopstandalone.py", a simple hello world
for PyPy.

For our example, the module must define a name called "target" which returns the
entry point. The translation process imports your module and looks for that
name, calls it, and the function object returned is where it starts the
translation.

::

    def run(fp):
        program_contents = ""
        while True:
            read = os.read(fp, 4096)
            if len(read) == 0:
                break
            program_contents += read
        os.close(fp)
        program, bm = parse(program_contents)
        mainloop(program, bm)

    def entry_point(argv):
        try:
            filename = argv[1]
        except IndexError:
            print "You must supply a filename"
            return 1
        
        run(os.open(filename, os.O_RDONLY, 0777))
        return 0

    def target(*args):
        return entry_point, None
        
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        entry_point(sys.argv)
        
The entry_point function is passed the command line arguments when you run the
resulting executable.

A few other things have changed here too. See the next section...

About RPython
=============
Let's talk a bit about RPython at this point. PyPy can't translate arbitrary
Python code because Python is a bit too dynamic. There are restrictions on what
standard library functions and what syntax constructs one can use. I won't be
going over all the restrictions, but for more information see
http://readthedocs.org/docs/pypy/en/latest/coding-guide.html#restricted-python

In the example above, you'll see a few things have changed.  I'm now using low
level file descriptors with os.open and os.read instead of file objects.
The implementation of "." and "," are similarly tweaked (not shown above).
Those are the only changes to make to this code, the rest is simple enough for
PyPy to digest.

That wasn't so hard, was it? I still get to use dictionaries, expandable lists,
and even classes and objects! And if low level file descriptors are too low for
you, there are some helpful abstractions in the rlib.streamio module included
with PyPy's "RPython standard library."

For the example thus far, see `<example2.py>`_

Translating
===========
If you haven't already, check yourself out the latest version of PyPy from
their bitbucket.org repository::

    $ hg clone https://bitbucket.org/pypy/pypy
    
(A recent revision is necessary because of a bugfix that makes my example
possible)

The script to run is in "pypy/translator/goal/translate.py". Run this script,
passing in our example module as an argument.

::

    $ python ./pypy/rpython/bin/rpython example2.py
    
(You can use PyPy's python interpreter for extra speed, but it's not necessary)

PyPy will churn for a bit, drawing some nice looking fractals to your console
while it works. It takes around 20 seconds on my machine.

The result from this is an executable binary that interprets BF programs.
Included in my repository are some example BF programs, including a mandelbrot
fractal generator, which takes about 45 seconds to run on my computer. Try it
out::

    $ ./example2-c mandel.b

Compare this to running the interpreter un-translated on top of python::

    $ python example2.py mandel.b
    
Takes forever, doesn't it?

So there you have it. We've successfully written our own interpreter in RPython
and translated it with the PyPy toolchain.

Adding JIT
==========
Translating RPython to C is pretty cool, but one of the best features of PyPy
is its ability to *generate just-in-time compilers for your interpreter*.
That's right, from just a couple hints on how your interpreter is structured,
PyPy will generate and include a JIT compiler that will, at runtime, translate
the interpreted code of our BF language to machine code!

So what do we need to tell PyPy to make this happen? First it needs to know
where the start of your bytecode evaluation loop is. This lets it keep track of
instructions being executed in the target language (BF).

We also need to let it know what defines a particular execution frame. Since
our language doesn't really have stack frames, this boils down to what's
constant for the execution of a particular instruction, and what's not. These
are called "green" and "red" variables, respectively.

Refer back to `<example2.py>`_ for the following.

In our main loop, there are four variables used: pc, program, bracket_map, and
tape. Of those, pc, program, and bracket_map are all green variables. They
*define* the execution of a particular instruction. If the JIT routines see the
same combination of green variables as before, it knows it's skipped back and
must be executing a loop.  The variable "tape" is our red variable, it's what's
being manipulated by the execution.

So let's tell PyPy this info. Start by importing the JitDriver class and making
an instance::

    from rpython.rlib.jit import JitDriver
    jitdriver = JitDriver(greens=['pc', 'program', 'bracket_map'],
            reds=['tape'])
    
And we add this line to the very top of the while loop in the mainloop
function::

        jitdriver.jit_merge_point(pc=pc, tape=tape, program=program,
                bracket_map=bracket_map)
                
We also need to define a JitPolicy. We're not doing anything fancy, so this is
all we need somewhere in the file::

    def jitpolicy(driver):
        from rpython.jit.codewriter.policy import JitPolicy
        return JitPolicy()
        
See this example at `<example3.py>`_
        
Now try translating again, but with the flag ``--opt=jit``::

    $ python ./pypy/rpython/bin/rpython --opt=jit example3.py

It will take significantly longer to translate with JIT enabled, almost 8
minutes on my machine, and the resulting binary will be much larger. When it's
done, try having it run the mandelbrot program again. A world of difference,
from 12 seconds compared to 45 seconds before!

Interestingly enough, you can see when the JIT compiler switches from
interpreted to machine code with the mandelbrot example. The first few lines of
output come out pretty fast, and then the program gets a boost of speed and
gets even faster.

A bit about Tracing JIT Compilers
=================================
It's worth it at this point to read up on how tracing JIT compilers work.
Here's a brief explanation: The interpreter is usually running your interpreter
code as written. When it detects a loop of code in the target language (BF) is
executed often, that loop is considered "hot" and marked to be traced. The next
time that loop is entered, the interpreter gets put in tracing mode where every
executed instruction is logged.

When the loop is finished, tracing stops. The trace of the loop is sent to an
optimizer, and then to an assembler which outputs machine code. That machine
code is then used for subsequent loop iterations.

This machine code is often optimized for the most common case, and depends on
several assumptions about the code. Therefore, the machine code will contain
guards, to validate those assumptions. If a guard check fails, the runtime
falls back to regular interpreted mode.

A good place to start for more information is
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Just-in-time_compilation

Debugging and Trace Logs
========================
Can we do any better? How can we see what the JIT is doing? Let's do two
things.

First, let's add a get_printable_location function, which is used during debug
trace logging::

    def get_location(pc, program, bracket_map):
        return "%s_%s_%s" % (
                program[:pc], program[pc], program[pc+1:]
                )
    jitdriver = JitDriver(greens=['pc', 'program', 'bracket_map'], reds=['tape'],
            get_printable_location=get_location)
            
This function is passed in the green variables, and should return a string.
Here, we're printing out the BF code, surrounding the currently executing
instruction with underscores so we can see where it is.

Download this as `<example4.py>`_ and translate it the same as example3.py.

Now let's run a test program (test.b, which just prints the letter "A" 15 or so
times in a loop) with trace logging::

    $ PYPYLOG=jit-log-opt:logfile ./example4-c test.b
    
Now take a look at the file "logfile". This file is quite hard to read, so
here's my best shot at explaining it.

The file contains a log of every trace that was performed, and is essentially a
glimpse at what instructions it's compiling to machine code for you. It's
useful to see if there are unnecessary instructions or room for optimization.

Each trace starts with a line that looks like this::

    [3c091099e7a4a7] {jit-log-opt-loop
    
and ends with a line like this::

    [3c091099eae17d jit-log-opt-loop}
    
The next line tells you which loop number it is, and how many ops are in it.
In my case, the first trace looks like this::


    1  [3c167c92b9118f] {jit-log-opt-loop
    2  # Loop 0 : loop with 26 ops
    3  [p0, p1, i2, i3]
    4  debug_merge_point('+<[>[_>_+<-]>.[<+>-]<<-]++++++++++.', 0)
    5  debug_merge_point('+<[>[>_+_<-]>.[<+>-]<<-]++++++++++.', 0)
    6  i4 = getarrayitem_gc(p1, i2, descr=<SignedArrayDescr>)
    7  i6 = int_add(i4, 1)
    8  setarrayitem_gc(p1, i2, i6, descr=<SignedArrayDescr>)
    9  debug_merge_point('+<[>[>+_<_-]>.[<+>-]<<-]++++++++++.', 0)
    10 debug_merge_point('+<[>[>+<_-_]>.[<+>-]<<-]++++++++++.', 0)
    11 i7 = getarrayitem_gc(p1, i3, descr=<SignedArrayDescr>)
    12 i9 = int_sub(i7, 1)
    13 setarrayitem_gc(p1, i3, i9, descr=<SignedArrayDescr>)
    14 debug_merge_point('+<[>[>+<-_]_>.[<+>-]<<-]++++++++++.', 0)
    15 i10 = int_is_true(i9)
    16 guard_true(i10, descr=<Guard2>) [p0]
    17 i14 = call(ConstClass(ll_dict_lookup__dicttablePtr_Signed_Signed), ConstPtr(ptr12), 90, 90, descr=<SignedCallDescr>)
    18 guard_no_exception(, descr=<Guard3>) [i14, p0]
    19 i16 = int_and(i14, -9223372036854775808)
    20 i17 = int_is_true(i16)
    21 guard_false(i17, descr=<Guard4>) [i14, p0]
    22 i19 = call(ConstClass(ll_get_value__dicttablePtr_Signed), ConstPtr(ptr12), i14, descr=<SignedCallDescr>)
    23 guard_no_exception(, descr=<Guard5>) [i19, p0]
    24 i21 = int_add(i19, 1)
    25 i23 = int_lt(i21, 114)
    26 guard_true(i23, descr=<Guard6>) [i21, p0]
    27 guard_value(i21, 86, descr=<Guard7>) [i21, p0]
    28 debug_merge_point('+<[>[_>_+<-]>.[<+>-]<<-]++++++++++.', 0)
    29 jump(p0, p1, i2, i3, descr=<Loop0>)
    30 [3c167c92bc6a15] jit-log-opt-loop}

I've trimmed the debug_merge_point lines a bit, they were really long.

So let's see what this does. This trace takes 4 parameters: 2 object pointers
(p0 and p1) and 2 integers (i2 and i3). Looking at the debug lines, it seems to
be tracing one iteration of this loop: "[>+<-]"

It starts executing the first operation on line 4, a ">", but immediately
starts executing the next operation. The ">" had no instructions, and looks
like it was optimized out completely.  This loop must always act on the same
part of the tape, the tape pointer is constant for this trace. An explicit
advance operation is unnecessary.

Lines 5 to 8 are the instructions for the "+" operation. First it gets the
array item from the array in pointer p1 at index i2 (line 6), adds 1 to it and
stores it in i6 (line 7), and stores it back in the array (line 8).

Line 9 starts the "<" instruction, but it is another no-op. It seems that i2
and i3 passed into this routine are the two tape pointers used in this loop
already calculated. Also deduced is that p1 is the tape array. It's not clear
what p0 is.

Lines 10 through 13 perform the "-" operation: get the array value (line 11),
subtract (line 12) and set the array value (line 13).

Next, on line 14, we come to the "]" operation. Lines 15 and 16 check whether
i9 is true (non-zero). Looking up, i9 is the array value that we just
decremented and stored, now being checked as the loop condition, as expected
(remember the definition of "]").  Line 16 is a guard, if the condition is not
met, execution jumps somewhere else, in this case to the routine called
<Guard2> and is passed one parameter: p0.

Assuming we pass the guard, lines 17 through 23 are doing the dictionary lookup
to bracket_map to find where the program counter should jump to.  I'm not too
familiar with what the instructions are actually doing, but it looks like there
are two external calls and 3 guards. This seems quite expensive, especially
since we know bracket_map will never change (PyPy doesn't know that).  We'll
see below how to optimize this.

Line 24 increments the newly acquired instruction pointer. Lines 25 and 26 make
sure it's less than the program's length.

Additionally, line 27 guards that i21, the incremented instruction pointer, is
exactly 86. This is because it's about to jump to the beginning (line 29) and
the instruction pointer being 86 is a precondition to this block.

Finally, the loop closes up at line 28 so the JIT can jump to loop body <Loop0>
to handle that case (line 29), which is the beginning of the loop again. It
passes in parameters (p0, p1, i2, i3).

Optimizing
==========
As mentioned, every loop iteration does a dictionary lookup to find the
corresponding matching bracket for the final jump. This is terribly
inefficient, the jump target is not going to change from one loop to the next.
This information is constant and should be compiled in as such.

The problem is that the lookups are coming from a dictionary, and PyPy is
treating it as opaque. It doesn't know the dictionary isn't being modified or
isn't going to return something different on each query.

What we need to do is provide another hint to the translation to say that the
dictionary query is a pure function, that is, its output depends *only* on its
inputs and the same inputs should always return the same output.

To do this, we use a provided function decorator rpython.rlib.jit.purefunction,
and wrap the dictionary call in a decorated function::

    @purefunction
    def get_matching_bracket(bracket_map, pc):
        return bracket_map[pc]
        
This version can be found at `<example5.py>`_

Translate again with the JIT option and observe the speedup. Mandelbrot now
only takes 6 seconds!  (from 12 seconds before this optimization)

Let's take a look at the trace from the same function::

    [3c29fad7b792b0] {jit-log-opt-loop
    # Loop 0 : loop with 15 ops
    [p0, p1, i2, i3]
    debug_merge_point('+<[>[_>_+<-]>.[<+>-]<<-]++++++++++.', 0)
    debug_merge_point('+<[>[>_+_<-]>.[<+>-]<<-]++++++++++.', 0)
    i4 = getarrayitem_gc(p1, i2, descr=<SignedArrayDescr>)
    i6 = int_add(i4, 1)
    setarrayitem_gc(p1, i2, i6, descr=<SignedArrayDescr>)
    debug_merge_point('+<[>[>+_<_-]>.[<+>-]<<-]++++++++++.', 0)
    debug_merge_point('+<[>[>+<_-_]>.[<+>-]<<-]++++++++++.', 0)
    i7 = getarrayitem_gc(p1, i3, descr=<SignedArrayDescr>)
    i9 = int_sub(i7, 1)
    setarrayitem_gc(p1, i3, i9, descr=<SignedArrayDescr>)
    debug_merge_point('+<[>[>+<-_]_>.[<+>-]<<-]++++++++++.', 0)
    i10 = int_is_true(i9)
    guard_true(i10, descr=<Guard2>) [p0]
    debug_merge_point('+<[>[_>_+<-]>.[<+>-]<<-]++++++++++.', 0)
    jump(p0, p1, i2, i3, descr=<Loop0>)
    [3c29fad7ba32ec] jit-log-opt-loop}
    
Much better! Each loop iteration is an add, a subtract, two array loads, two
array stores, and a guard on the exit condition. That's it! This code doesn't
require *any* program counter manipulation.

I'm no expert on optimizations, this tip was suggested by Armin Rigo on the
pypy-dev list. Carl Friedrich has a series of posts on how to optimize your
interpreter that are also very useful: http://bit.ly/bundles/cfbolz/1

Final Words
===========
I hope this has shown some of you what PyPy is all about other than a faster
implementation of Python.

For those that would like to know more about how the process works, there are
several academic papers explaining the process in detail that I recommend. In
particular: Tracing the Meta-Level: PyPy's Tracing JIT Compiler.

See http://readthedocs.org/docs/pypy/en/latest/extradoc.html
